# Exercise 1: Monitor AVS VMs with Azure Monitoring 

## Lab objectives

In this Exercise, you will complete the following tasks:

+ Task 1: Create a Log Analytics Workspace
+ Task 2: Configuration on VMware Side
+ Task 3: Log Analytics Queries and Analysis
+ Task 4: Check Performance Counters
+ Task 5: Network Information
+ Task 6: Virtual Machine Details

### Task 1: Create a Log Analytics Workspace

  - In the Azure portal, navigate to the "Monitor" section.
  - Under "Settings," select "Log Analytics."
  - Click on "Add" to create a new Log Analytics workspace.
  
- **Enable Monitoring for AVS:**
  - Go to the Azure VMware Solution resource in the Azure portal.
  - Under "Monitoring," enable monitoring and select the Log Analytics workspace you created.

### Task 2: Configuration on VMware Side

- **Install and Configure the Log Analytics Agent:**
  - On your VMware virtual machines running in AVS, install the Log Analytics agent.
  - The agent forwards logs to your Log Analytics workspace.

### Task 3: Log Analytics Queries and Analysis

1.Once the logs are streaming into Log Analytics, you can use Kusto Query Language (KQL) to create queries and analyze the logs.

- Retrieve General Information:

    Retrieve basic information about your AVS environment, including resource details and provisioning state.

    ```kusto
    Resources
    | where ResourceId contains "<Your AVS Resource ID>"
    | project ResourceId, Location, ProvisioningState
    ```

    Replace `<Your AVS Resource ID>` with the actual Resource ID of your AVS instance.

- View Events:

    View events related to your AVS environment, including details like event level, timestamp, and message.

    ```kusto
    Event
    | where Resource == "<Your AVS Resource ID>"
    | project TimeGenerated, EventLevelName, Message
    ```

### Task 4: Check Performance Counters

Check performance counters for your AVS environment, such as CPU usage, memory usage, etc.

```kusto
Perf
| where Resource == "<Your AVS Resource ID>"
| summarize avg(CounterValue) by CounterName
```

### Task 5: Network Information

Retrieve network-related information for your AVS environment, including network interfaces and IP addresses.

```kusto
NetworkInterfaces
| where ResourceId contains "<Your AVS Resource ID>"
| project ResourceId, Name, MacAddress, IpConfigurations
```

### Task 6: Virtual Machine Details

Retrieve details about virtual machines in your AVS environment.

```kusto
Vm
| where ResourceId contains "<Your AVS Resource ID>"
| project ResourceId, Name, Status, HardwareProfile, OSProfile
```

## Review
In this exercise, you have completed:
- Created a Log Analytics Workspace
- Configurated on VMware Side
- Run log Analytics Queries and Analysed
- Checked Performance Counters
- Network Information
- Virtual Machine Details